---
title: "Getting Away from Google"
date: 2020-08-23 00:30:00 -0000
categories: Personal
---

Today, I woke up with a somewhat radical idea in mind: I wanted to reduce my dependency on Google's services in my everyday life.

Year after year, I've become more and more dependent on the services Google provides. I've used GMail for more than 10 years now. I used Google Docs at school to share documents with friends, and I still use it very often for collaborative and personal work (I don't even bother installing LibreOffice anymore). I switched to Chrome a few years ago, and I didn't use any other browser since then. I've increasingly started to store my passwords directly in my Google account, because of the convenience, instead of my KeepassXC database.

As I believe that Google exerts a monopoly that should be fought, I decided to regain some independance.

My objective here is therefore to free myself from Google, and to be able to use other services - should I choose to do so. I don't want to stop using Google completely, but rather to use less of its services.

## Passwords

Passwords are probably one of the strongest arguments in favor of the Google ecosystem. When I register on a website, Google generates the password for me and saves it immediately. I can then access it from my Android device or my other PC. Nothing else is involved, just a pure perfect user experience. I could not move to Firefox without finding a new option to store my passwords.

However, this comes at a cost: Google has all my passwords, and I have no clue about how they are stored by Google. I _kinda_ trust Google with my passwords, but I don't trust the devices on which I use Chrome. 

My previous solution, KeepassXC, was very inconvenient. The database is local, meaning I have to find a solution to synchronize it between my devices. In practice, I just didn't to that, and the database on my Android phone was different from the database on my computer. 
Moreover, the process to log-in or register was very cumbersome. You'd have to go to KeepassXC, find or create the entry, and copy the password back into the browser or app. On Android, the search was not clever at all and only matched the package name (not similar domain names or entries).
KeepassHTTP, the extension bringing Keepass in the browser, was not satisfying either, as it didn't work reliably. KeepassXC could therefore **not** be part of my solution.

After discussing about my project on Twitter, someone recommended **BitWarden**. What they offer is very nice: it's in the cloud, but you can host it on your own server. There is a very cool browser intergration, as well as an Android app and a bunch of browser extensions. They offer a free plan, and a few premium options. An unofficial API implementation in Rust, [BitWarden_RS](https://github.com/dani-garcia/bitwarden_rs), even provides these features for free. As it is easier to deploy, and because the premium features are interesting, I decided to install this implementation on my dedicated server. It is as simple as installing Docker and running a command + a small nginx unit for proxying. Very intuitive.

> :information_source: Why not Firefox Lockwise? This solution cannot be hosted on premise, and doesn't allow easy export of the passwords. Moreover, it doesn't have a standalone PC client - countrary to BitWarden. I therefore decided to go with BitWarden, as it would allow me to easily switch browser in the future.

To set-up BitWarden, I created a new e-mail address with ProtonMail, so that my new password manager would not be linked to my old Google account. For now, I stick with their free plan, as their limits are perfectly sufficient. 

I picked a strong password, which I am learning. Until I remember it perfectly, this password is stored in a separate KeepassXC database that is duplicated on a few of my devices, in case my laptop would die before I know the password perfectly. I also created a database to hold my TOTP backup keys, in case my phone would die. I'll buy a YubiKey soon, so I'll be able to use this instead.

BitWarden being hosted on my server, I am exposing myself to the risk of loosing the passwords database. As this databse is encrypted using my master password, I can safely copy this database in multiple places to reduce the risk of loosing it. I therefore have an automated script that copies the database to a FTP server and sends it to me via mail, every hour. I plan to make physical copies of the database as often as possible, in case I'd lose access to both the FTP server and my email account.

After setting up BitWarden, I exported my Chromium passwords database and my KeepassXC database and imported both of them in BitWarden. Then, I moved all the newly imported entries to an import folder. My plan is to change all the passwords I imported. When I change a password, I move the entry in the main folder. I also need to get rid of the numerous duplicates created by the imports. 

The BitWarden integration is not as seamless as the native Chromium integration, but it is good enough, and I am willing to accept some inconvenience in my quest for independance.
